llvm/docs/GettingStartedTutorials.rst, before:

Getting Started/Tutorials
=========================

For those new to the LLVM system.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   CompilerWriterInfo
   Frontend/PerformanceTips
   GettingStarted
   GettingStartedVS
   ProgrammersManual
   tutorial/index

:doc:`GettingStarted`
   Discusses how to get up and running quickly with the LLVM infrastructure.
   Everything from unpacking and compilation of the distribution to execution
   of some tools.

:doc:`tutorial/index`
   Tutorials about using LLVM. Includes a tutorial about making a custom
   language with LLVM.

:doc:`ProgrammersManual`
  Introduction to the general layout of the LLVM sourcebase, important classes
  and APIs, and some tips & tricks.

:doc:`Frontend/PerformanceTips`
   A collection of tips for frontend authors on how to generate IR
   which LLVM is able to effectively optimize.

:doc:`GettingStartedVS`
   An addendum to the main Getting Started guide for those using Visual Studio
   on Windows.

:doc:`CompilerWriterInfo`
  A list of helpful links for compiler writers.

Commit message:

[docs] Add a new tutorial that talk about how to make a change to llvm
This tutorial will guide you through the process of making a change to LLVM, and contributing it back to the LLVM project.
We'll be making a change to Clang, but the steps for other parts of LLVM are the same. Even though the change we'll be making is simple,
we're going to cover steps like building LLVM, running the tests, and code review. This is good practice, and you'll be prepared for making larger changes.

Authors: @meikeb , @gribozavr
Commit: Zhiqian Xia

PS - This is a duplicate revision of https://reviews.llvm.org/D100714 which was actually used for patch review.

Reviewed By: kuhnel

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D108267

llvm/docs/GettingStartedTutorials.rst, after:

Getting Started/Tutorials
=========================

For those new to the LLVM system.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   CompilerWriterInfo
   Frontend/PerformanceTips
   GettingStarted
   GettingStartedVS
   ProgrammersManual
   tutorial/index
   MyFirstTypoFix

:doc:`GettingStarted`
   Discusses how to get up and running quickly with the LLVM infrastructure.
   Everything from unpacking and compilation of the distribution to execution
   of some tools.

:doc:`tutorial/index`
   Tutorials about using LLVM. Includes a tutorial about making a custom
   language with LLVM.

:doc:`ProgrammersManual`
  Introduction to the general layout of the LLVM sourcebase, important classes
  and APIs, and some tips & tricks.

:doc:`Frontend/PerformanceTips`
   A collection of tips for frontend authors on how to generate IR
   which LLVM is able to effectively optimize.

:doc:`GettingStartedVS`
   An addendum to the main Getting Started guide for those using Visual Studio
   on Windows.

:doc:`CompilerWriterInfo`
  A list of helpful links for compiler writers.

:doc:`MyFirstTypoFix`
   This tutorial will guide you through the process of making a change to
   LLVM, and contributing it back to the LLVM project.
