llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-profdata.rst, before:

llvm-profdata - Profile data tool
=================================

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-profdata` *command* [*args...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llvm-profdata` tool is a small utility for working with profile
data files.

COMMANDS
--------

* :ref:`merge <profdata-merge>`
* :ref:`show <profdata-show>`

.. program:: llvm-profdata merge

.. _profdata-merge:

MERGE
-----

SYNOPSIS
^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata merge` [*options*] [*filenames...*]

DESCRIPTION
^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata merge` takes several profile data files
generated by PGO instrumentation and merges them together into a single
indexed profile data file.

OPTIONS
^^^^^^^

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -output=output, -o=output

 Specify the output file name.  *Output* cannot be ``-`` as the resulting
 indexed profile data can't be written to standard output.

.. option:: -instr (default)

 Specify that the input profile is an instrumentation-based profile.

.. option:: -sample

 Specify that the input profile is a sample-based profile.
 
 The format of the generated file can be generated in one of three ways:

 .. option:: -binary (default)

 Emit the profile using a binary encoding. For instrumentation-based profile
 the output format is the indexed binary format. 

 .. option:: -text

 Emit the profile in text mode. This option can also be used with both
 sample-based and instrumentation-based profile. When this option is used
 the profile will be dumped in the text format that is parsable by the profile
 reader.

 .. option:: -gcc

 Emit the profile using GCC's gcov format (Not yet supported).

.. program:: llvm-profdata show

.. _profdata-show:

SHOW
----

SYNOPSIS
^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata show` [*options*] [*filename*]

DESCRIPTION
^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata show` takes a profile data file and displays the
information about the profile counters for this file and
for any of the specified function(s).

If *filename* is omitted or is ``-``, then **llvm-profdata show** reads its
input from standard input.

OPTIONS
^^^^^^^

.. option:: -all-functions

 Print details for every function.

.. option:: -counts

 Print the counter values for the displayed functions.

.. option:: -function=string

 Print details for a function if the function's name contains the given string.

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -output=output, -o=output

 Specify the output file name.  If *output* is ``-`` or it isn't specified,
 then the output is sent to standard output.

.. option:: -instr (default)

 Specify that the input profile is an instrumentation-based profile.

.. option:: -text

 Instruct the profile dumper to show profile counts in the text format of the
 instrumentation-based profile data representation. By default, the profile
 information is dumped in a more human readable form (also in text) with
 annotations.

.. option:: -sample

 Specify that the input profile is a sample-based profile.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

:program:`llvm-profdata` returns 1 if the command is omitted or is invalid,
if it cannot read input files, or if there is a mismatch between their data.

Commit message:

[llvm-profdata] Add support for weighted merge of profile data
This change adds support for an optional weight when merging profile data with the llvm-profdata tool.
Weights are specified by adding an option ':<weight>' suffix to the input file names.

Adding support for arbitrary weighting of input profile data allows for relative importance to be placed on the
input data from multiple training runs.

Both sampled and instrumented profiles are supported.

Reviewers: dnovillo, bogner, davidxl

Subscribers: llvm-commits

Differential Revision: http://reviews.llvm.org/D14547

llvm-svn: 254669

llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-profdata.rst, after:

llvm-profdata - Profile data tool
=================================

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-profdata` *command* [*args...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llvm-profdata` tool is a small utility for working with profile
data files.

COMMANDS
--------

* :ref:`merge <profdata-merge>`
* :ref:`show <profdata-show>`

.. program:: llvm-profdata merge

.. _profdata-merge:

MERGE
-----

SYNOPSIS
^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata merge` [*options*] [*filename[:weight]...*]

DESCRIPTION
^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata merge` takes several profile data files
generated by PGO instrumentation and merges them together into a single
indexed profile data file.

The profile counts in each input file can be scaled (multiplied) by specifying
``<filename>:<weight>``, where `<weight>` is a decimal integer >= 1.
A default weight of 1 is assumed if only `<filename>` is given.

OPTIONS
^^^^^^^

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -output=output, -o=output

 Specify the output file name.  *Output* cannot be ``-`` as the resulting
 indexed profile data can't be written to standard output.

.. option:: -instr (default)

 Specify that the input profile is an instrumentation-based profile.

.. option:: -sample

 Specify that the input profile is a sample-based profile.
 
 The format of the generated file can be generated in one of three ways:

 .. option:: -binary (default)

 Emit the profile using a binary encoding. For instrumentation-based profile
 the output format is the indexed binary format. 

 .. option:: -text

 Emit the profile in text mode. This option can also be used with both
 sample-based and instrumentation-based profile. When this option is used
 the profile will be dumped in the text format that is parsable by the profile
 reader.

 .. option:: -gcc

 Emit the profile using GCC's gcov format (Not yet supported).

.. program:: llvm-profdata show

.. _profdata-show:

SHOW
----

SYNOPSIS
^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata show` [*options*] [*filename*]

DESCRIPTION
^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`llvm-profdata show` takes a profile data file and displays the
information about the profile counters for this file and
for any of the specified function(s).

If *filename* is omitted or is ``-``, then **llvm-profdata show** reads its
input from standard input.

OPTIONS
^^^^^^^

.. option:: -all-functions

 Print details for every function.

.. option:: -counts

 Print the counter values for the displayed functions.

.. option:: -function=string

 Print details for a function if the function's name contains the given string.

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -output=output, -o=output

 Specify the output file name.  If *output* is ``-`` or it isn't specified,
 then the output is sent to standard output.

.. option:: -instr (default)

 Specify that the input profile is an instrumentation-based profile.

.. option:: -text

 Instruct the profile dumper to show profile counts in the text format of the
 instrumentation-based profile data representation. By default, the profile
 information is dumped in a more human readable form (also in text) with
 annotations.

.. option:: -sample

 Specify that the input profile is a sample-based profile.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

:program:`llvm-profdata` returns 1 if the command is omitted or is invalid,
if it cannot read input files, or if there is a mismatch between their data.
