llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-addr2line.rst, before:

llvm-addr2line - a drop-in replacement for addr2line
====================================================

.. program:: llvm-addr2line

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-addr2line` [*options*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

:program:`llvm-addr2line` is an alias for the :manpage:`llvm-symbolizer(1)`
tool with different defaults. The goal is to make it a drop-in replacement for
GNU's :program:`addr2line`.

Here are some of those differences:

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` defaults not to print function names. Use `-f`_ to enable
   that.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` defaults not to demangle function names. Use `-C`_ to
   switch the demangling on.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` defaults not to print inlined frames. Use `-i`_ to show
   inlined frames for a source code location in an inlined function.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` uses `--output-style=GNU`_ by default.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` parses options from the environment variable
   ``LLVM_ADDR2LINE_OPTS`` instead of from ``LLVM_SYMBOLIZER_OPTS``.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`llvm-symbolizer(1)`

.. _-f: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-f
.. _-C: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-c
.. _-i: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-i
.. _--output-style=GNU: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-output-style

Commit message:

llvm-addr2line: assume addresses on the command line are hexadecimal rather than attempting to guess the base based on the form of the number.
Summary:
This matches the behavior of GNU addr2line. We previously treated
hexadecimal addresses as binary if they started with 0b, otherwise as
octal if they started with 0, otherwise as decimal.

This only affects llvm-addr2line; the behavior of llvm-symbolize is
unaffected.

Reviewers: ikudrin, rupprecht, jhenderson

Subscribers: llvm-commits

Tags: #llvm

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D73306

llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-addr2line.rst, after:

llvm-addr2line - a drop-in replacement for addr2line
====================================================

.. program:: llvm-addr2line

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-addr2line` [*options*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

:program:`llvm-addr2line` is an alias for the :manpage:`llvm-symbolizer(1)`
tool with different defaults. The goal is to make it a drop-in replacement for
GNU's :program:`addr2line`.

Here are some of those differences:

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` interprets all addresses as hexadecimal and ignores an
   optional ``0x`` prefix, whereas ``llvm-symbolizer`` attempts to determine
   the base from the literal's prefix and defaults to decimal if there is no
   prefix.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` defaults not to print function names. Use `-f`_ to enable
   that.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` defaults not to demangle function names. Use `-C`_ to
   switch the demangling on.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` defaults not to print inlined frames. Use `-i`_ to show
   inlined frames for a source code location in an inlined function.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` uses `--output-style=GNU`_ by default.

-  ``llvm-addr2line`` parses options from the environment variable
   ``LLVM_ADDR2LINE_OPTS`` instead of from ``LLVM_SYMBOLIZER_OPTS``.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`llvm-symbolizer(1)`

.. _-f: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-f
.. _-C: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-c
.. _-i: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-i
.. _--output-style=GNU: llvm-symbolizer.html#llvm-symbolizer-opt-output-style
